docs/migration_from_pyspark.md, before:

# Migrating from PySpark to Mock-Spark

## Overview

Mock-Spark is a drop-in replacement for PySpark designed for testing and development. It provides 100% API compatibility with PySpark while using Polars as the default backend for fast, in-memory processing.

## Drop-in Replacement

### Basic Migration

Change one line in your imports:

```python
# Before
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession, functions as F
from pyspark.sql.types import *

# After  
from mock_spark.sql import SparkSession, functions as F
from mock_spark.sql.types import *
```

### Session Creation

```python
# PySpark
spark = SparkSession.builder \
    .appName("MyApp") \
    .config("spark.sql.adaptive.enabled", "true") \
    .getOrCreate()

# Mock-Spark (identical API)
spark = SparkSession.builder \
    .appName("MyApp") \
    .config("spark.sql.adaptive.enabled", "true") \
    .getOrCreate()
```

### DataFrame Operations

All DataFrame operations work identically:

```python
# Both PySpark and Mock-Spark
df = spark.createDataFrame([
    {"id": 1, "name": "Alice", "age": 25},
    {"id": 2, "name": "Bob", "age": 30}
])

# Column access (both syntaxes supported)
df.select("name", df.age, F.col("id"))  # ✅ Works
df.select(df.name, df.age, F.col("id"))  # ✅ Works

# Operations
result = df.filter(df.age > 25) \
    .withColumn("category", F.when(df.age > 30, "senior").otherwise("junior")) \
    .groupBy("category") \
    .agg(F.count("*").alias("count"))
```

## API Compatibility

### ✅ Fully Supported

- **DataFrame Operations**: select, filter, withColumn, drop, join, union, etc.
- **Column Access**: Both `df.column_name` and `F.col("column_name")` syntax
- **Functions**: All PySpark functions (F.col, F.when, F.lit, etc.)
- **Window Functions**: row_number, rank, dense_rank, lag, lead, first, last
- **Aggregations**: count, sum, avg, min, max, countDistinct, first, last
- **Datetime Functions**: to_timestamp, hour, dayofweek, current_date, etc.
- **String Functions**: contains, startswith, endswith, like, rlike, regexp
- **Type Casting**: cast to string, int, long, double, float, boolean, date, timestamp
- **Catalog Operations**: createDatabase, setCurrentDatabase, currentDatabase, listTables
- **Data Types**: All PySpark data types (StringType, IntegerType, etc.)

### 🔄 Enhanced Features

- **Better Error Messages**: Clear, actionable error messages with suggestions
- **Debug Mode**: Enable SQL logging for troubleshooting
- **Validation Rules**: String and list-based validation expressions
- **Performance**: 10x faster than PySpark for most operations
- **Storage API**: Convenient `.storage` API for database and table management (mock-spark-specific)

### 📝 Mock-Spark-Specific Features

#### Storage API

Mock-Spark provides a convenient `.storage` API for managing databases and tables. This is a **mock-spark-specific feature** that doesn't exist in PySpark. In PySpark, you would use SQL commands instead.

**Mock-Spark (using .storage API):**
```python
from mock_spark.sql import SparkSession
from mock_spark.sql.types import StructType, StructField, StringType, IntegerType

spark = SparkSession("MyApp")

# Create database/schema
spark._storage.create_schema("test_db")

# Create table with schema
schema = StructType([
    StructField("name", StringType(), True),
    StructField("age", IntegerType(), True)
])
spark._storage.create_table("test_db", "users", schema)

# Insert data
spark._storage.insert_data("test_db", "users", [
    {"name": "Alice", "age": 25},
    {"name": "Bob", "age": 30}
])
```

**PySpark (using SQL commands):**
```python
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession
from pyspark.sql.types import StructType, StructField, StringType, IntegerType

spark = SparkSession.builder.appName("MyApp").getOrCreate()

# Create database/schema
spark.sql("CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS test_db")

# Create table with schema
schema = StructType([
    StructField("name", StringType(), True),
    StructField("age", IntegerType(), True)
])
df = spark.createDataFrame([], schema)
df.write.saveAsTable("test_db.users")

# Insert data
spark.sql("INSERT INTO test_db.users VALUES ('Alice', 25), ('Bob', 30)")
```

**Compatibility Note:** For maximum compatibility with PySpark, use SQL commands in mock-spark. Both approaches work in mock-spark, but SQL commands are portable to PySpark:

```python
# Works in both mock-spark and PySpark
spark.sql("CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS test_db")
spark.sql("CREATE TABLE test_db.users (name STRING, age INT)")
spark.sql("INSERT INTO test_db.users VALUES ('Alice', 25), ('Bob', 30)")
```

### ⚠️ Known Limitations

#### SQL Generation Issues
Some complex operations may have SQL generation issues that are being addressed:

```python
# May have issues with complex CAST operations
df.select(df.column.cast("timestamp"))  # ⚠️ SQL generation issue

# Workaround: Use explicit type conversion
df.select(F.to_timestamp(df.column))
```

#### Window Function SQL Translation
Window functions work correctly but may not be optimized in SQL generation:

```python
# Works but may not be SQL-optimized
window = Window.partitionBy("category").orderBy("timestamp")
df.withColumn("row_num", F.row_number().over(window))
```

#### Complex Type Operations
Some complex type operations may need workarounds:

```python
# Array operations may need explicit handling
df.select(F.explode(df.array_column))  # ✅ Works
df.select(F.array_contains(df.array_column, "value"))  # ✅ Works
```

## Performance Considerations

### Speed Improvements

Mock-Spark is significantly faster than PySpark for most operations:

- **Simple Operations**: 10-50x faster
- **Complex Aggregations**: 5-20x faster  
- **Window Functions**: 3-10x faster
- **Joins**: 2-5x faster

### Memory Usage

- **Lower Memory Footprint**: Uses Polars' efficient columnar storage
- **No JVM Overhead**: Pure Python implementation
- **Automatic Cleanup**: Temporary tables are automatically cleaned up

## Debugging Guide

### Enable Debug Mode

```python
# Enable SQL logging
spark.conf.set("spark.sql.debug", "true")

# Or set globally
import mock_spark
mock_spark.set_debug_mode(True)
```

### Common Error Messages

#### Column Not Found
```
MockSparkColumnNotFoundError: Column 'invalid_column' not found
Available columns: ['id', 'name', 'age']
```

**Solution**: Check column name spelling and case sensitivity.

#### Type Mismatch
```
MockSparkTypeMismatchError: Cannot cast 'string' to 'integer'
Column: age, Value: 'not_a_number'
```

**Solution**: Ensure data types are compatible or use proper type conversion.

#### SQL Generation Error
```
MockSparkSQLGenerationError: SQL syntax error in generated query
Operation: filter
```

**Solution**: Simplify the expression or use alternative syntax.

### SQL Logging

When debug mode is enabled, you'll see generated SQL:

```
[DEBUG] Operation: filter
[DEBUG] SQL: SELECT * FROM temp_table_123 WHERE age > 25
```

## Testing Patterns

### Unit Testing

```python
import pytest
from mock_spark.sql import SparkSession, functions as F

@pytest.fixture
def spark():
    return SparkSession("test")

def test_data_processing(spark):
    df = spark.createDataFrame([
        {"id": 1, "value": 10},
        {"id": 2, "value": 20}
    ])
    
    result = df.filter(df.value > 15).collect()
    assert len(result) == 1
    assert result[0]["id"] == 2
```

### Integration Testing

```python
def test_complex_pipeline(spark):
    # Test entire data pipeline
    df = spark.read.json("data.json")
    
    processed = df.filter(df.status == "active") \
        .withColumn("processed_at", F.current_timestamp()) \
        .groupBy("category") \
        .agg(F.count("*").alias("count"))
    
    results = processed.collect()
    assert len(results) > 0
```

### Performance Testing

```python
import time

def test_performance(spark):
    df = spark.createDataFrame(large_dataset)
    
    start = time.time()
    result = df.filter(df.value > 1000).count()
    end = time.time()
    
    assert result > 0
    assert (end - start) < 1.0  # Should complete in under 1 second
```

## Migration Checklist

### Before Migration

- [ ] Identify all PySpark imports in your codebase
- [ ] List all DataFrame operations used
- [ ] Note any custom UDFs or complex operations
- [ ] Check for any PySpark-specific configurations

### During Migration

- [ ] Replace PySpark imports with Mock-Spark imports
- [ ] Update session creation (usually no changes needed)
- [ ] Test basic DataFrame operations
- [ ] Verify column access patterns work
- [ ] Test aggregation and window functions
- [ ] Validate type casting operations

### After Migration

- [ ] Run full test suite
- [ ] Verify performance improvements
- [ ] Check error messages are helpful
- [ ] Document any workarounds needed
- [ ] Update CI/CD pipelines

## Troubleshooting

### Import Issues

```python
# If you get import errors
from mock_spark.sql import SparkSession, functions as F
from mock_spark.sql.types import *
```

### Session Issues

```python
# If session creation fails
spark = SparkSession("my_app")
# Instead of
spark = SparkSession.builder.appName("my_app").getOrCreate()
```

### Data Type Issues

```python
# If you get type errors, check your data types
from mock_spark.sql.types import StringType, IntegerType, StructType, StructField

schema = StructType([
    StructField("id", IntegerType(), True),
    StructField("name", StringType(), True)
])
```

## Getting Help

### Documentation

- **API Reference**: `docs/api_reference.md`
- **Testing Patterns**: `docs/testing_patterns.md`
- **Type Reference**: `docs/types.md`

### Community

- **GitHub Issues**: Report bugs and request features
- **Discussions**: Ask questions and share solutions
- **Examples**: Check the `examples/` directory

### Support

For issues specific to Mock-Spark:

1. Check the error message for specific guidance
2. Enable debug mode to see generated SQL
3. Verify your PySpark code works with real PySpark
4. Check the API parity tests for examples
5. Open an issue with detailed error information

## Examples

### Basic Data Processing

```python
from mock_spark.sql import SparkSession, functions as F

# Create session
spark = SparkSession("data_processing")

# Create DataFrame
df = spark.createDataFrame([
    {"id": 1, "name": "Alice", "age": 25, "salary": 50000},
    {"id": 2, "name": "Bob", "age": 30, "salary": 60000},
    {"id": 3, "name": "Charlie", "age": 35, "salary": 70000}
])

# Process data
result = df.filter(df.age > 25) \
    .withColumn("senior", F.when(df.age > 30, True).otherwise(False)) \
    .groupBy("senior") \
    .agg(F.avg("salary").alias("avg_salary")) \
    .collect()

print(result)
```

### Window Functions

```python
from mock_spark.sql import Window

# Define window
window = Window.partitionBy("department").orderBy("salary")

# Apply window functions
result = df.withColumn("rank", F.rank().over(window)) \
    .withColumn("row_num", F.row_number().over(window)) \
    .withColumn("lag_salary", F.lag("salary", 1).over(window)) \
    .collect()
```

### Complex Aggregations

```python
# Multiple aggregations
result = df.groupBy("department") \
    .agg(
        F.count("*").alias("count"),
        F.avg("salary").alias("avg_salary"),
        F.max("salary").alias("max_salary"),
        F.min("salary").alias("min_salary")
    ) \
    .collect()
```

This migration guide should help you successfully transition from PySpark to Mock-Spark while maintaining full functionality and gaining significant performance improvements.

Commit message:

Rename package from mock-spark to sparkless
- Rename package directory from mock_spark/ to sparkless/
- Rename storage directory from mock_spark_storage/ to sparkless_storage/
- Update all imports from mock_spark to sparkless
- Update package name in pyproject.toml to sparkless
- Update environment variables from MOCK_SPARK_* to SPARKLESS_*
- Update configuration keys from spark.mock.* to spark.sparkless.*
- Update all documentation (README, docs, examples)
- Update GitHub URLs to use sparkless
- Update all test files and fixtures
- Update scripts, Makefile, and install.sh
- All 1348 tests passing

docs/migration_from_pyspark.md, after:

# Migrating from PySpark to Sparkless

## Overview

Sparkless is a drop-in replacement for PySpark designed for testing and development. It provides 100% API compatibility with PySpark while using Polars as the default backend for fast, in-memory processing.

## Drop-in Replacement

### Basic Migration

Change one line in your imports:

```python
# Before
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession, functions as F
from pyspark.sql.types import *

# After  
from sparkless.sql import SparkSession, functions as F
from sparkless.sql.types import *
```

### Session Creation

```python
# PySpark
spark = SparkSession.builder \
    .appName("MyApp") \
    .config("spark.sql.adaptive.enabled", "true") \
    .getOrCreate()

# Sparkless (identical API)
spark = SparkSession.builder \
    .appName("MyApp") \
    .config("spark.sql.adaptive.enabled", "true") \
    .getOrCreate()
```

### DataFrame Operations

All DataFrame operations work identically:

```python
# Both PySpark and Sparkless
df = spark.createDataFrame([
    {"id": 1, "name": "Alice", "age": 25},
    {"id": 2, "name": "Bob", "age": 30}
])

# Column access (both syntaxes supported)
df.select("name", df.age, F.col("id"))  # ✅ Works
df.select(df.name, df.age, F.col("id"))  # ✅ Works

# Operations
result = df.filter(df.age > 25) \
    .withColumn("category", F.when(df.age > 30, "senior").otherwise("junior")) \
    .groupBy("category") \
    .agg(F.count("*").alias("count"))
```

## API Compatibility

### ✅ Fully Supported

- **DataFrame Operations**: select, filter, withColumn, drop, join, union, etc.
- **Column Access**: Both `df.column_name` and `F.col("column_name")` syntax
- **Functions**: All PySpark functions (F.col, F.when, F.lit, etc.)
- **Window Functions**: row_number, rank, dense_rank, lag, lead, first, last
- **Aggregations**: count, sum, avg, min, max, countDistinct, first, last
- **Datetime Functions**: to_timestamp, hour, dayofweek, current_date, etc.
- **String Functions**: contains, startswith, endswith, like, rlike, regexp
- **Type Casting**: cast to string, int, long, double, float, boolean, date, timestamp
- **Catalog Operations**: createDatabase, setCurrentDatabase, currentDatabase, listTables
- **Data Types**: All PySpark data types (StringType, IntegerType, etc.)

### 🔄 Enhanced Features

- **Better Error Messages**: Clear, actionable error messages with suggestions
- **Debug Mode**: Enable SQL logging for troubleshooting
- **Validation Rules**: String and list-based validation expressions
- **Performance**: 10x faster than PySpark for most operations
- **Storage API**: Convenient `.storage` API for database and table management (sparkless-specific)

### 📝 Sparkless-Specific Features

#### Storage API

Sparkless provides a convenient `.storage` API for managing databases and tables. This is a **sparkless-specific feature** that doesn't exist in PySpark. In PySpark, you would use SQL commands instead.

**Sparkless (using .storage API):**
```python
from sparkless.sql import SparkSession
from sparkless.sql.types import StructType, StructField, StringType, IntegerType

spark = SparkSession("MyApp")

# Create database/schema
spark._storage.create_schema("test_db")

# Create table with schema
schema = StructType([
    StructField("name", StringType(), True),
    StructField("age", IntegerType(), True)
])
spark._storage.create_table("test_db", "users", schema)

# Insert data
spark._storage.insert_data("test_db", "users", [
    {"name": "Alice", "age": 25},
    {"name": "Bob", "age": 30}
])
```

**PySpark (using SQL commands):**
```python
from pyspark.sql import SparkSession
from pyspark.sql.types import StructType, StructField, StringType, IntegerType

spark = SparkSession.builder.appName("MyApp").getOrCreate()

# Create database/schema
spark.sql("CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS test_db")

# Create table with schema
schema = StructType([
    StructField("name", StringType(), True),
    StructField("age", IntegerType(), True)
])
df = spark.createDataFrame([], schema)
df.write.saveAsTable("test_db.users")

# Insert data
spark.sql("INSERT INTO test_db.users VALUES ('Alice', 25), ('Bob', 30)")
```

**Compatibility Note:** For maximum compatibility with PySpark, use SQL commands in sparkless. Both approaches work in sparkless, but SQL commands are portable to PySpark:

```python
# Works in both sparkless and PySpark
spark.sql("CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS test_db")
spark.sql("CREATE TABLE test_db.users (name STRING, age INT)")
spark.sql("INSERT INTO test_db.users VALUES ('Alice', 25), ('Bob', 30)")
```

### ⚠️ Known Limitations

#### SQL Generation Issues
Some complex operations may have SQL generation issues that are being addressed:

```python
# May have issues with complex CAST operations
df.select(df.column.cast("timestamp"))  # ⚠️ SQL generation issue

# Workaround: Use explicit type conversion
df.select(F.to_timestamp(df.column))
```

#### Window Function SQL Translation
Window functions work correctly but may not be optimized in SQL generation:

```python
# Works but may not be SQL-optimized
window = Window.partitionBy("category").orderBy("timestamp")
df.withColumn("row_num", F.row_number().over(window))
```

#### Complex Type Operations
Some complex type operations may need workarounds:

```python
# Array operations may need explicit handling
df.select(F.explode(df.array_column))  # ✅ Works
df.select(F.array_contains(df.array_column, "value"))  # ✅ Works
```

## Performance Considerations

### Speed Improvements

Sparkless is significantly faster than PySpark for most operations:

- **Simple Operations**: 10-50x faster
- **Complex Aggregations**: 5-20x faster  
- **Window Functions**: 3-10x faster
- **Joins**: 2-5x faster

### Memory Usage

- **Lower Memory Footprint**: Uses Polars' efficient columnar storage
- **No JVM Overhead**: Pure Python implementation
- **Automatic Cleanup**: Temporary tables are automatically cleaned up

## Debugging Guide

### Enable Debug Mode

```python
# Enable SQL logging
spark.conf.set("spark.sql.debug", "true")

# Or set globally
import sparkless
sparkless.set_debug_mode(True)
```

### Common Error Messages

#### Column Not Found
```
MockSparkColumnNotFoundError: Column 'invalid_column' not found
Available columns: ['id', 'name', 'age']
```

**Solution**: Check column name spelling and case sensitivity.

#### Type Mismatch
```
MockSparkTypeMismatchError: Cannot cast 'string' to 'integer'
Column: age, Value: 'not_a_number'
```

**Solution**: Ensure data types are compatible or use proper type conversion.

#### SQL Generation Error
```
MockSparkSQLGenerationError: SQL syntax error in generated query
Operation: filter
```

**Solution**: Simplify the expression or use alternative syntax.

### SQL Logging

When debug mode is enabled, you'll see generated SQL:

```
[DEBUG] Operation: filter
[DEBUG] SQL: SELECT * FROM temp_table_123 WHERE age > 25
```

## Testing Patterns

### Unit Testing

```python
import pytest
from sparkless.sql import SparkSession, functions as F

@pytest.fixture
def spark():
    return SparkSession("test")

def test_data_processing(spark):
    df = spark.createDataFrame([
        {"id": 1, "value": 10},
        {"id": 2, "value": 20}
    ])
    
    result = df.filter(df.value > 15).collect()
    assert len(result) == 1
    assert result[0]["id"] == 2
```

### Integration Testing

```python
def test_complex_pipeline(spark):
    # Test entire data pipeline
    df = spark.read.json("data.json")
    
    processed = df.filter(df.status == "active") \
        .withColumn("processed_at", F.current_timestamp()) \
        .groupBy("category") \
        .agg(F.count("*").alias("count"))
    
    results = processed.collect()
    assert len(results) > 0
```

### Performance Testing

```python
import time

def test_performance(spark):
    df = spark.createDataFrame(large_dataset)
    
    start = time.time()
    result = df.filter(df.value > 1000).count()
    end = time.time()
    
    assert result > 0
    assert (end - start) < 1.0  # Should complete in under 1 second
```

## Migration Checklist

### Before Migration

- [ ] Identify all PySpark imports in your codebase
- [ ] List all DataFrame operations used
- [ ] Note any custom UDFs or complex operations
- [ ] Check for any PySpark-specific configurations

### During Migration

- [ ] Replace PySpark imports with Sparkless imports
- [ ] Update session creation (usually no changes needed)
- [ ] Test basic DataFrame operations
- [ ] Verify column access patterns work
- [ ] Test aggregation and window functions
- [ ] Validate type casting operations

### After Migration

- [ ] Run full test suite
- [ ] Verify performance improvements
- [ ] Check error messages are helpful
- [ ] Document any workarounds needed
- [ ] Update CI/CD pipelines

## Troubleshooting

### Import Issues

```python
# If you get import errors
from sparkless.sql import SparkSession, functions as F
from sparkless.sql.types import *
```

### Session Issues

```python
# If session creation fails
spark = SparkSession("my_app")
# Instead of
spark = SparkSession.builder.appName("my_app").getOrCreate()
```

### Data Type Issues

```python
# If you get type errors, check your data types
from sparkless.sql.types import StringType, IntegerType, StructType, StructField

schema = StructType([
    StructField("id", IntegerType(), True),
    StructField("name", StringType(), True)
])
```

## Getting Help

### Documentation

- **API Reference**: `docs/api_reference.md`
- **Testing Patterns**: `docs/testing_patterns.md`
- **Type Reference**: `docs/types.md`

### Community

- **GitHub Issues**: Report bugs and request features
- **Discussions**: Ask questions and share solutions
- **Examples**: Check the `examples/` directory

### Support

For issues specific to Sparkless:

1. Check the error message for specific guidance
2. Enable debug mode to see generated SQL
3. Verify your PySpark code works with real PySpark
4. Check the API parity tests for examples
5. Open an issue with detailed error information

## Examples

### Basic Data Processing

```python
from sparkless.sql import SparkSession, functions as F

# Create session
spark = SparkSession("data_processing")

# Create DataFrame
df = spark.createDataFrame([
    {"id": 1, "name": "Alice", "age": 25, "salary": 50000},
    {"id": 2, "name": "Bob", "age": 30, "salary": 60000},
    {"id": 3, "name": "Charlie", "age": 35, "salary": 70000}
])

# Process data
result = df.filter(df.age > 25) \
    .withColumn("senior", F.when(df.age > 30, True).otherwise(False)) \
    .groupBy("senior") \
    .agg(F.avg("salary").alias("avg_salary")) \
    .collect()

print(result)
```

### Window Functions

```python
from sparkless.sql import Window

# Define window
window = Window.partitionBy("department").orderBy("salary")

# Apply window functions
result = df.withColumn("rank", F.rank().over(window)) \
    .withColumn("row_num", F.row_number().over(window)) \
    .withColumn("lag_salary", F.lag("salary", 1).over(window)) \
    .collect()
```

### Complex Aggregations

```python
# Multiple aggregations
result = df.groupBy("department") \
    .agg(
        F.count("*").alias("count"),
        F.avg("salary").alias("avg_salary"),
        F.max("salary").alias("max_salary"),
        F.min("salary").alias("min_salary")
    ) \
    .collect()
```

This migration guide should help you successfully transition from PySpark to Sparkless while maintaining full functionality and gaining significant performance improvements.
